STATEMENTS AND FLOW CONTROL

Simple C++ statements are the individual instructions in a program, like variable declarations and assignments.
They always end with a semicolon (;) and are executed in the same order in which they appear.

Flow control statements allow flexibility in the program process. Many of them require a generic (sub)statement as
part of the syntax. This statement may either be a simple C++ statement, - such as a single instruction, terminated
with a semicolon (;) - or a compound statement. A compound statement is a group of statements (each of them terminated
by its own semicolon), but all grouped together in a block, enclosed in curly braces {}, for example:

{ statement1; statement2; statement3; }

The entire block is considered a single statement (composed itself of multiple sub-statements). Whenever a generic
statement is part of the syntax of a flow control statement, this can either be a simple statement or a compound
statement.


Selection statements: if and else

The if keyword is used to execute a statement or block, if, and only if, a condition is fulfilled. Its syntax is:

if (condition) statement;

To include more than a single statement to be executed when the condition is fulfilled, these statements shall be
enclosed in braces ({}), forming a block.

Indentation and line breaks improve code readability

Selection statements with if can also specify what happens when the condition is not fulfilled, by using the else
keyword to introduce an alternative statement, for example:

if (condition) statement1; else statement2;

Several statements are enclosed in braces {}.

if (condition) 
{
   statement1;
   statement2; 
}
else 
{
   statement2;
   ...;
}

Several if + else structures can be concatenated with the intention of checking a range of values.


Selection statement: switch

The purpose of switch is to check for a value among a number of possible constant expressions. It is something
similar to concatenating if-else statements, but limited to constant expressions. Its most typical syntax is:

switch (expression)
{
  case constant1:
     {group-of-statements-1;}
     break;
  case constant2:
     {group-of-statements-2;}
     break;
  .
  .
  .
  default:
     {default-group-of-statements;}
}

The switch statement has a rather peculiar syntax inherited from the early times of the first C compilers, because
it uses labels instead of blocks. In the most typical use, this means that break statements are needed after each
group of statements for a particular label. If break is not included, all statements following the case (including
those under any other labels) are also executed, until the end of the switch block or a jump statement (such as break)
is reached. To check for ranges or values that are not constant, it is better to use concatenations of
if and else if statements.


Iteration statements (loops)

Loops repeat a statement a certain number of times, or while a condition is fulfilled. They are introduced by the
keywords while, do, and for.

The while loop

The while-loop simply repeats statement while expression is true. If, after any execution of statement, expression is
no longer true, the loop ends, and the program continues right after the loop. Its syntax is:

while (expression) 
{
   statements;
}


The do-while loop

Very similar to the while-loop, except that condition is evaluated after the execution of statement instead of before,
guaranteeing at least one execution of statement, even if condition is never fulfilled. Its syntax is:

do 
{
   statements; 
}   
while (condition);


The for loop

Like the while-loop, this loop repeats statement while condition is true. But, in addition, the for loop provides
specific locations to contain an initialization and an increase expression, executed before the loop begins the
first time, and after each iteration, respectively. Its syntax is:

for (initialization; condition; increase) statement;

It works in the following way:

1. initialization is executed. Declares a counter variable, and sets it to the 
   initial value. Executed once, at the beginning of the loop.
2. condition is checked. If it is true, the loop continues; otherwise, the loop 
   ends, and statement is skipped, going directly to step 5.
3. statement is executed. As usual, it can be either a single statement or a 
   block enclosed in curly braces { }.
4. increase is executed, and the loop gets back to step 2.
5. the loop ends: execution continues by the next statement after it.

The three fields in a for-loop are optional. They can be left empty, but in all cases the semicolon signs between
them are required. For example, for (;n<10;) is a loop without initialization or increase (equivalent to a
while-loop); and for (;n<10;++n) is a loop with increase, but no initialization (maybe because the variable was
already initialized before the loop). A loop with no condition is equivalent to a while loop with true as condition
(i.e., an infinite loop).

Because each of the fields is executed in a particular time in the life cycle of a loop, it may be useful to execute
more than a single expression as any of initialization, condition, or statement. Unfortunately, these are not
statements but simple expressions and they cannot be replaced by a block. As expressions, they can however make use
of the comma operator (,). This operator is an expression separator, and can separate multiple expressions where only
one is generally expected. For example, using it, it would be possible for a for loop to handle two counter variables,
initializing and increasing both:

for ( n=0, i=100 ; n!=i ; ++n, --i )
{
    // whatever here...
}


Range-based for loop

The for-loop has another syntax, which is used exclusively with ranges:

for ( declaration : range ) statement;

This kind of for loop iterates over all the elements in range, where declaration declares some variable able to take
the value of an element in this range. Ranges are sequences of elements, including arrays, containers, and any other
type supporting the functions begin and end. For example, strings, which are sequences of characters.

std::string str {"Hello!"};
for (char c : str)
{
     // whatever here...
}


Jump statements: break, continue, goto

The break statement
leaves a loop, even if the condition for its end is not fulfilled. It can be used to end an infinite loop, or to
force it to end before its natural end.

The continue statement
causes the program to skip the rest of the loop in the current iteration, as if the end of the statement block had
been reached, causing it to jump to the start of the following iteration.

The goto statement
allows to make an absolute jump to another point in the program. This unconditional jump ignores nesting levels, and
does not cause any automatic stack unwinding. Therefore, it is a feature to use with care, and preferably within the
same block of statements, especially in the presence of local variables. The destination point is identified by a
label, which is then used as an argument for the goto statement. A label is made of a valid identifier followed by
a colon (:). goto is generally deemed a low-level feature, with no particular use cases in modern higher-level
programming paradigms generally used with c++.

